---
layout: post
title: "Running Out Of Power At The Grand Canyon"
date: 2012-03-29 17:41
comments: false
categories:
- Photography
tags:
- Cameras
- Battery
- Backups
- Flash
---

I'm currently in the last 48 hours of my first ever visit to the Grand
Canyon in Arizona.  Just hours before setting out to see the Canyon for
the first time, I realized that I couldn't recharge my camera's battery.
I had 80% of a full charge, and four more days of vacation to go.  Time to
panic?

<!-- more -->

On Monday I drove through Sedona, Arizona with a fully-charged battery,
taking many pictures at each stop.  By early evening we reached our hotel
in Tusayan, a mile from the entrance to the Grand Canyon National Park.
That night I prepared my gadgets for the next day, when we were to visit
the Canyon for the first time.  I charged my phone, charged my laptop, and
tried to charge my camera.

When I placed the camera battery in its charger, the light on the charger
came on and immediately turned off.  "That's odd," I thought.  I removed
the battery and placed it in again.  Again, the light went on
momentarily.  I tried a third time, but the light never turned on again.

I could have a bad charger, or a bad battery, or both.  I put the battery
into the camera, and it seemed to work fine.  Breathing a sigh of relief I
realized that it was only my charger that was broken.

If I rationed my photography, I thought, I might be able to make it
through this vacation on the 80% charge that I had left.  But I didn't
want to have to worry about taking too many pictures on a
once-in-a-lifetime trip, and I would need a new charger anyway.  So I
ordered a charger and spare battery from Amazon, and they promised to have
them delivered on Wednesday.

To Amazon's credit, they delivered the charger as promised, an hour before
we left for a sunset tour.  In the 36 hours before I got the new charger
one simple decision and one camera setting allowed me to take as many
pictures as I normally would without having to worry about running out of
juice even if the new charger never came.

## Battery Saving Tips

There are two functions of a modern digital camera that need a lot of
power.  The first is the on-camera flash.  Fortunately for me, I had an
external flash that had its own power source: four AA batteries.  Using
the external flash exclusively meant that the camera battery didn't have
to throw all the light required for those backlit shots of the family with
a brightly-lit canyon in the background.  Also, AA batteries are easy to
find at any gas station or general store.

The second function that taxes the camera's battery is the display on the back -
the monitor.  On my digital SLR, by default the monitor displays the
photograph just taken for 10 seconds.  I had already set this to the
minimum value of 4 seconds.  Minimizing the amount of time that the
monitor is in use can greatly improve your battery's performance.

## Morals Of The Story

1. When you're on the road for an important photo shoot, keep a spare,
fully-charged battery.  You may never need to use it, but if you do, you'll
be glad you have it.

2. Use an external flash if at all possible - It will prolong your battery
life and give you the option to try out multiple-flash photographs.

3. Don't waste your battery browsing through pictures on your camera if
you don't need to.  Minimize the time spent using your monitor to maximize
your battery life.

4. When you're on vacation with family, when you're not a Pro shooting for
a client, remember that it's just a camera.  The vacation can be fun even
if you don't take any pictures.  You're in a beautiful place with the most
important people in your life.  Enjoy yourself and make some memories that
everyone will share fondly.
